All right, so I want to pause here before we continue and talk about when to use assertions,
but also when their use is inappropriate.
First, let's identify different types of invariants.
Firstly, an internal invariant.
Internal invariants are usually progammatic assumptions
that might have been comments in the past, which are better served with assertions.
You've been in the situation I’m sure, where the code's changed,
but the comment hasn't been edited.
If on the other hand, the comment took the form of an assert statement,
both the code and the assert statement would stay in sync.
The next invariant type is Control-Flow.
Place assertions at any location you assume will not be reached,
but which the compiler would not recognize as unreachable.
Third invariant type – preconditions.
By convention, preconditions
and public methods are enforced by explicit checks on the parameters,
and assertions should not be used for the situation.
However, preconditions on non-public methods is a better use of assertions.
Next invariant type – Postconditions.
You can test postconditions
with assertions in both public and non-public methods.
And the last one Class invariants.
This type of invariant applies to every instance of a class at all times.
So, back to the code, we'll be walking through a few of these in variants in code.
We want to start by creating a new class. Let's go ahead and do that.
We'll call this class invariant examples.
I'm going to put this in its own package,
that'll be assertion.invariant.InvariantExamples.
Okay, pasting the code.
All right, so in this example, try to imagine that we want to provide formularies
for pet food for certain types of animals considered pets.
So, you can see that I've started out there
by declaring an enum which is a list of pet types
for which we'll be providing formularies.
I've also got a main method there which you can see
which loops through the pet types and retrieves and prints formularies.
And moving on down, we've also got a private method here that's using a switch statement
to return the formulary, a string description.
So, I've added an assert statement
to the default case, the control flow invariant,
so it's assumed we're only supporting these types of pets.
Any assumption is a good place for an assertion
and obviously, I can run this. We haven't enabled assertions.
So far so good, but let's actually add
or edit our configuration with dash -ea again,
because we want to use assertions, we want them enabled.
So, let's now say that management wants to add support for a formulary for parrots.
So, what we can do is come up to our enum and add parrot to the enum.
And with assertions enabled, let's run the code again.
You can see now that adding an assert statement that makes assumptions about the expected types
will help future developers recognize areas of the application
that will need to be updated to support a new type.
All right, so let's undo that change and remove parrot from a list of enums.
All right, so let's look at a few more invariants. I'm going to add some code down here
just before the end of our class.
All right, so what I have added here,
some examples of pre and postcondition invariants
and an internal invariant.
So, it's a public method that I’ve pasted in here getPetTypeAgeDescription.
It takes the parameter PetType which is our enum, and a PetAge and int.
Note that I checked the pet age value as the first order of business
and thrown an illegal argument exception if the age is less than zero.
By convention, public methods should perform explicit checks that throw
particular exceptions.
Moving on down there, I've also got to assert there on line 55,
and you can see a prefix that with bad practice assertion
to check validity of public method parameters.
So, I do have an assert statement to check the parameter value,
but even if assertions were enabled,
this assert statement would never be true
because of the explicit checks throwing an illegal argument exception above it.
If you relied only on the assert statement
for checking the parameter, you'll be exposing the application to a lot of bad data,
since generally, assertions are disabled by default.
Using an assertion to test the validity of public method parameters is considered bad practice.
So moving further on down into our method,
I've included an internal invariant assert statement in the outer else statement
because this code assumes two categories of ages.
One set for cat dog another for gerbil hamster
and assumes to be no other category.
And towards the bottom of the method there,
I've included a postcondition assert statement
which confirms that the age description
being returned from the method belongs to one of a predefined set
defined in the assert statement.
All right, so if we go back to our main method, let's actually test this method out.
And I’m just going to replace the code here,
basically replace that entire for loop
and you can see we're now actually calling our getPetTypeAgeDescription method.
Now, if we run it,
and we get the following output as you can see on screen there,
now that'll be the case whether assertions are enabled or disabled.
So, let's change the enum again.
This time we're going to add parrot back again.
Run the code again.
This time, we have got an insertion error as we would expect
because we've added an enum that's not supported,
but the big problem here is if assertions are not enabled,
we'll come back and disable assertions
run the code.
And you can see what's happened there. Is a baby parrot a pup?
It's a chick, so the code needs changes.
And again, we saw previously with assertions enabled
that crashed, but I'll just add those again anyway.
And run it again. We do see that assertion this time.
So, this assertion was able to catch an assumption made,
we could also have added a custom message that would have been more helpful.
Note that the assertion error was thrown an execution entered,
so the next assert statement in this method is therefore never tested.
So obviously, looking at the code,
we didn't get beyond this assert statement, we can get to this one down here.
Due to the assertion on line 68
being false and therefore execution being terminated.
All right, so let's end the video here and in the next one,
let's fix this particular section of code.
See you in the next video.